---
layout: post
title: "AI Coding Agents confirm that Agile and XP still stand"
date:   2025-04-24
categories: ai
description: >
  We now write code with AI and rely more than ever on clean code, unit testing,
  good documentation, and other XP and Agile practices that have kept us
  productive all along. Clean code, XP, and Agile are also making a big comeback
  in areas where they were previously neglected. This post explores how AI coding
  reaffirms these practices.
---


Clean code, [XP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extreme_programming), and some
Agile practices have curiously made a big comeback now that we use AI coding
agents like Claude Code, Augment, or Cursor.

"Come back" might be a strong word here - after all, hopefully, most teams have
been following these practices all along. Nevertheless, it's now clear that the
practices that kept us - human software engineers - sane and productive all
these years are even more relevant now with AI agents for coding. **Ultimately,
they benefit both human and AI**.


# AI × XP, in legacy and greenfield projects

Teams that have been writing clean code, designing clear architectures with
good abstractions and separation of concerns, relying on unit tests, and
keeping the documentation up to date now find themselves in an advantageous
position when it comes to using Claude Code and similar tools. Granted,
documentation and unit tests can now be easily generated with AI, and the code
can be refactored, but good groundwork and the proper testing or documentation
of those pesky corner cases still provide a significant advantage. Anyone who
survived the "rewrite this whole thing" type of project knows what I mean.

In other, probably smaller side projects, where we thought that unit tests were
an overkill, or where we kept the READMEs generated by `create-react-app` (we
all have a couple of those, right?), we are now updating the documentation and
catching up on test coverage, making these projects better for both human
developers and AI agents.

Greenfield projects illustrate this even better. My typical Claude Code
workflow in a greenfield?

  - Write down an idea,
  - tell Opus, "You are a product manager..." and generate `docs/features.md`,
  - similarly, generate and review an architecture in `docs/architecture.md`,
  - break down the work into stories or tasks ("You are the Technical Team
    Leader...") in `docs/planning.md`,
  - finally, use Claude Code to "Implement task FEAT-001 and don't forget to
    run tests and linters when done",
  - rinse and repeat,

where splitting work into the smallest possible deliverables is key for quality
results, and validating the results automatically with tests is key for AI to
complete the task with full autonomy.


# Human engineers and AI: both like unit tests when they pass

I am really glad to see that time-honored and simple pragmatic practices like
writing clean code, having unit tests, etc., which mostly stem from XP, are, in
a way, being reaffirmed by AI Agents for Coding.

In some ways, it is somewhat unsurprising - after all, LLMs naturally
replicate our own reasoning, and AI Coding Agents are created by trained
software engineers.

Yet, it is interesting to note that these specific practices are the ones that
stand out and, crucially, **make life easier for both software engineers and
AI**.
